# Introduction to Web Development

Learn the foundations of web development!

Welcome to the section of the course focused on the basics of web
development. In this section, you will learn or review how to work with
HTML, the language of the web, and CSS, a tool for styling webpages.

Then dive into how computers can send and receive information from a
website using the Python requests module.

Letâ€™s get started!

# Introduction to HTML

Learn HTML, the foundation of all web pages.

When building a Flask web application, we are creating interactive HTML
sites with a Python backend. HTML, or Hypertext Markup Language, is the
language of the web. HTML gives web pages their order and structure. If
you have a background in introductory HTML, great! Feel free to continue
on through the skill path with your knowledge.

Never worked with HTML before? Or are you a little shakey on the
structure of web pages and basic HTML? Have no fear! We recommend taking
a break from the skill path and checking out at least the <a
href="https://www.codecademy.com/learn/learn-html/modules/learn-html-elements"
class="e14vpv2g1 gamut-xro1w8-ResetElement-Anchor-AnchorBase e1bhhzie0"
target="_blank">first module of content (Elements and Structure) in our
Learn HTML course here</a> before proceeding.

# Introduction to CSS

Learn how to style and visually organize webpages with CSS.

Basic HTML can leave a web page looking drab and plain. CSS, or
Cascading Style Sheets, give life to web pages by allowing you to add
color and design to your site. If you have a background in introductory
CSS, great! Feel free to continue on through the skill path with your
knowledge.

Never worked with CSS before? Or are you a little shakey how CSS styles
a webpage? Have no fear! We recommend taking a break from the skill path
and checking out at least the <a
href="https://www.codecademy.com/learn/learn-css/modules/learn-css-selectors-visual-rules"
class="e14vpv2g1 gamut-xro1w8-ResetElement-Anchor-AnchorBase e1bhhzie0"
target="_blank">first module of content, Selectors and Visual Rules, in
our Learn CSS course here</a> before proceeding.
